Update the how to extend Ballerina page (#1627)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-www: website/two-column-pages/docs/learn/how-to-extend-ballerina.md

# Extending Ballerina

> Annotations can be used to provide structured metadata about a particular construct. Annotations are not executable, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Annotations can be used to provide structured metadata about a particular construct. Annotations are not executable.
```

> but can be used to alter the behaviour of constructs they are attached to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, they can be used to alter the behavior of constructs they are attached to.
```

Author: Are we using American spelling in the website?

Reviewer: Yes. In all WSO2 content, as a general practice, we use American spelling standards.

Annotations can be attached to:

> - Services and resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- services and resources
```
Better to use lowercase here since its the continuation of the phrase above.

> - Type definitions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- type definitions
```

> - Function definitions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- function definitions
```

> - Function parameters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- function parameters
```

> - Function return

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- function return
```

> - Module level variables and constants

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- module-level variables and constants
```

> - Annotations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- annotations
```

> - Listeners

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- listeners
```

> - Workers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- workers
```

> - Type cast expressions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- type cast expressions
```

> The Ballerina compiler can be extended using compiler extensions if required for additional verification or processing 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Ballerina compiler can be extended using compiler extensions (if required) for additional verification or processing 
```

(e.g., modifications, artifact generation etc.). Such custom extensions provided will be executed at the end of the 

> compilation phase, before generating the Ballerina Intermediate Representation (BIR). A compiler extension can make use 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
compilation phase before generating the Ballerina Intermediate Representation (BIR). A compiler extension can make use 
```

of the metadata provided via annotations to introduce additional behaviour to the compilation process. 

> Custom annotations are how the `ballerina/docker` and `ballerina/kubernetes` modules work. They introduce new 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `ballerina/docker` and `ballerina/kubernetes` modules work using custom annotations. They introduce new 
```

Author: ```suggestion
The `ballerina/docker` and `ballerina/kubernetes` modules make use of custom annotations. They introduce new 
```
How about the above instead?

Reviewer: +1

annotations such as `@docker:Config` and `@kubernetes:Deployment` that can be attached to certain constructs in a 
Ballerina source file. The respective compiler extensions then run a post-compilation process that reads these 
annotations and generates the Docker and Kubernetes deployment artifacts.

> > **Note:** Currently there are two caveats to writing compiler extensions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** Currently, there are two caveats that are used to write compiler extensions:
```

Author: The original wording is correct right? The listed two are two limitations/conditions for writing compiler extensions

Reviewer: Let's change it to "Currently, there are two caveats when writing compiler extensions:"

Author: ```suggestion
> **Note:** Currently, there are two caveats when writing compiler extensions:
```

> > 1. The Ballerina Compiler is written in Java 8. Therefore you will need JDK 1.8.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 1. The Ballerina Compiler is written in Java 8. Therefore, you will need JDK 1.8.
```

> > 2. End users will have to manually install the extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 2. End users will have to install the extension manually.
```

## Hello World: The Annotation Way

> In this guide we will take a look at how to create a custom annotation and how to write a compiler extension to read 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this guide, we will take a look at how to create a custom annotation and how to write a compiler extension to read 
```

> and act upon our custom annotation. The custom annotation, `@hello:Greeting`, is attachable to functions. It has an 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and act upon our custom annotation. The custom annotation,(i.e., `@hello:Greeting`), is attachable to functions. It has an 
```

> attribute called salutation which will be read by the compiler extension and written to a file when building the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
attribute called 'salutation', which will be read by the compiler extension and written to a file when building the 
```

> program. The annotation can be shared with others by publishing it to Ballerina Central. Currently there isn’t a 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
program. The annotation can be shared with others by publishing it to Ballerina Central. Currently, there isn’t a 
```

> mechanism for sharing compiler extensions. The compiler extension has to be copied to `<BALLERINA_HOME>/bre/lib`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mechanism for sharing compiler extensions. The compiler extension has to be copied to the `<BALLERINA_HOME>/bre/lib` directory.
```

The end user would be able to write a program such as the following:

```ballerina
import foo/hello;

@hello:Greeting {
    salutation: "Guten Tag!"
}
function add(int x, int y) returns int {
    return x + y;
}

public function main() {
    var sum = add(10, 20);
}
```

At the end of the build, the user should be able to see a `<module_name>.txt` file in the `target/greetings/` directory.

## Defining a Custom Annotation

### Creating the Annotation

> Create a new Ballerina project and add a module named `hello`. For the purpose of our exercise, let’s add a single 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a new Ballerina project and add a module named `hello`. For this instance, add a single 
```

source file named `annotation.bal` and remove other boilerplate code and files. Your project structure should look 
similar to the following:
```
.
├── Ballerina.toml
└── src
    └── hello
        └── annotation.bal
```

> Add the following code for defining the `@hello:Greeting` annotation to the `annotation.bal` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the following code to define the `@hello:Greeting` annotation in the `annotation.bal` file.
```

```ballerina
# This record defines the fields of the @hello:Greeting annotation. 
#
# + salutation - The greeting message
public type HelloConfiguration record {|
    string salutation = "Hello!";
|};

# Define an annotation named `Greeting`. Its type is `HelloConfiguration` and it can be
# attached to services. 
public annotation HelloConfiguration Greeting on service;
```

> Now let’s build this annotation. The `-c` flag is used since this module will only be used as a library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, build this annotation. The `-c` flag is used since this module will only be used as a library.
```
You don't say "let's" in technical writing.

```
$ ballerina build -c hello
```

> If all went well, your should have a `/target` directory with the built artifacts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If all went well, a `/target` directory should be created with the built artifacts.
```

```
target/
├── balo
│   └── hello-2019r3-any-0.1.0.balo
├── caches
│   ├── bir_cache
│   │   └── foo
│   │       └── hello
│   │           └── 0.1.0
│   │               └── hello.bir
│   └── jar_cache
│       └── foo
│           └── hello
│               └── 0.1.0
│                   └── foo-hello-0.1.0.jar
└── tmp
    └── foo-hello-0.1.0.jar
```

### Verifying the Annotation

> Although you cannot do anything with the annotation just yet, you can verify what we’ve done so far by using the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alt this stage, you can use the annotation only to verify what was done so far by using it 
```
It is better to use passive voice. Changed the sentence to lessen the negative sense.

annotation in a program. Create a demo project, add our `hello` module as a dependency, and attach it to a function. 
Your program should compile without any errors.

> Our demo project structure looks like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The demo project structure looks like the following:
```

```
.
├── Ballerina.toml
└── src
    └── greet
        └── greeting.bal
```

Add the `foo/hello` module as a path dependency in the `Ballerina.toml` file.

```toml
[project]
org-name= "foo"
version= "0.1.0"

[dependencies]
"foo/hello" = {path = "<path_to_annotation_project_dir>/hello-annot/target/balo/hello-2019r3-any-0.1.0.balo"}
```

> In the `greeting.bal`, add a function. Note how we’ve annotated the function using our `@hello:Greeting` annotation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a function to the `greeting.bal` file. Note that the function is annotated using the `@hello:Greeting` annotation. 
```
It is better to avoid possessive pronouns AMAP.

```ballerina
import foo/hello;

@hello:Greeting {
    salutation: "Guten Tag!"
}
function add(int x, int y) returns int {
    return x + y;
}

public function main() {
    var sum = add(10, 20);
}
```

Building the `greet` module should produce an executable named `greet.jar` in the `/target/bin` directory.
 
## Writing the Compiler Extension

The Ballerina compiler can be extended through compiler extensions if there are additional verifications or tasks you 
would like to perform. Such custom extensions will be executed towards the end of the compilation phase. A compiler 
extension can be created by implementing the `CompilerPlugin` interface provided by the 

> `org.ballerinalang.compiler.plugins` package. It defines the following methods which the user can implement to add 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`org.ballerinalang.compiler.plugins` package. It defines the following methods, which the user can implement to add 
```

additional verifications. 
- `void process(PackageNode packageNode)`
- `void process(BLangTestablePackage testablePackageNode)`
- `void process(ServiceNode serviceNode, List<AnnotationAttachmentNode> annotations)`
- `void process(TypeDefinition typeDefinition, List<AnnotationAttachmentNode> annotations)`
- `void process(FunctionNode functionNode, List<AnnotationAttachmentNode> annotations)`
- `void process(SimpleVariableNode variableNode, List<AnnotationAttachmentNode> annotations)`
- `void process(AnnotationNode annotationNode, List<AnnotationAttachmentNode> annotations)`
- `void codeGenerated(PackageID packageID, Path binaryPath)`

Each of the `process()` methods correspond to annotable constructs of the language. The `codegenerated()` method gets 
invoked once the code generation phase is completed. The `org.ballerinalang.compiler.plugins` package also provides a 
convenience class named `AbstractCompilerPlugin` with empty implementations for the above methods.

> The extension we write will read the salutation field of the `@hello:Greeting` annotation and write its value to a 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The extension will read the salutation field of the `@hello:Greeting` annotation and write its value to a 
```

file in the `/target` directory. 

### Setting up the Project

> Let’s start by creating a Java project for the extension. We’ll need two classes: `HelloPlugin` and `HelloModel`. Also 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start by creating a Java project for the extension. It needs two classes: `HelloPlugin` and `HelloModel`. Also,
```

create a resource file named `org.ballerinalang.compiler.plugins.CompilerPlugin` in the `resources/META-INF/services` 

> directory. This file should contain the fully qualified class name of the extension class (which in this case, is 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
directory. This file should contain the fully-qualified class name of the extension class (which in this case, is 
```

`xyz.foo.hello.HelloPlugin`).
```
src/
└── main
    ├── java
    │   └── xyz
    │       └── foo
    │           └── hello
    │               ├── HelloModel.java
    │               └── HelloPlugin.java
    └── resources
        └── META-INF
            └── services
                └── org.ballerinalang.compiler.plugins.CompilerPlugin
```

The only dependency you will need for this extension is the `ballerina-lang` project. Add the following Maven repository 

> to your project to get the `ballerina-lang-1.0.0.jar`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to your project to get the `ballerina-lang-1.0.0.jar`file.
```

Author: ```suggestion
to your project to get the `ballerina-lang` dependency.
```
Will change to this, instead of mentioning the JAR file.

import java.util.List;

/**
 * Compiler extension to generate greetings.
 */
// This annotation specifies that this compiler extension should only be enabled when the mentioned module is used.
@SupportedAnnotationPackages(
        value = "foo/hello:0.1.0"
)
public class HelloPlugin extends AbstractCompilerPlugin {

    private DiagnosticLog dlog;

    @Override
    public void init(DiagnosticLog diagnosticLog) {
        this.dlog = diagnosticLog;
    }

>     // Our annotation is attached to functions. Therefore, we override the process() method for functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // The annotation is attached to functions. Therefore, the process() method is overridden for functions.
```

    @Override
    public void process(FunctionNode functionNode, List<AnnotationAttachmentNode> annotations) {

>         // Iterate through the annotations attached to the service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // Iterate through the annotations attached to the service.
```

        for (AnnotationAttachmentNode annotation : annotations) {
            // The `annotations` list contains all the annotations attached to the service.

>             // Since we are only interested in our annotation, we'll just skip the other annotations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            // Since only the custom annotation is considered, skip the other annotations.
```

Author: ```suggestion
            // Since only the `@hello:Greeting` annotation is considered, skip the other annotations.
```
Changing to this since the intended message to give was that we are only interested in the annotation we added. Custom annotation doesn't necessarily mean an annotation we added.

            if (!"Greeting".equals(annotation.getAnnotationName().getValue())) {
                continue;
            }

            // Retrieve the fields of the annotation value.
            List<BLangRecordKeyValue> annotFields =
                    ((BLangRecordLiteral) ((BLangAnnotationAttachment) annotation).expr).getKeyValuePairs();

>             // In this particular case, there is no need to iterate through the list since our annotation only has

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            // In this particular case, there is no need to iterate through the list since the custom annotation only has
```

Author: ```suggestion
            // In this particular case, there is no need to iterate through the list since the `@hello:Greeting` annotation only has
```
Changing to this due to the same reason as mentioned above.

>             // one field. So let's just take the first element of the fields list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            // one field. Therefore, take the first element of the fields list.
```

            BLangRecordKeyValue salutationField = annotFields.get(0);
            String annotFieldValue = ((BLangLiteral) salutationField.getValue()).getValue().toString();
            String greeting = String.format("%s from %s()\n", annotFieldValue, functionNode.getName().getValue());
            HelloModel.getInstance().setGreeting(greeting);
        }
    }

>     // The codeGenerated() method gets invoked once the executable is built. We write the greeting to a text file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // The `codeGenerated()` method gets invoked once the executable is built. The greeting is written to a text file
```

    }
}
```

Add the following code to the `HelloModel.java` file. 

```java
class HelloModel {

    private static HelloModel instance = new HelloModel();
    private String greeting;

    private HelloModel() {
    }

    static HelloModel getInstance() {
        return instance;
    }

    String getGreetings() {
        return greeting;
    }

    void setGreeting(String greeting) {
        this.greeting = greeting;
    }
}
```

Finally, build the extension and place the resulting JAR file inside the `<BALLERINA_HOME>/bre/lib` directory. 

## Putting It All Together

Now, build your hello world project again. You should see an additional step logged in the console for generating the 
greeting.

```
$ ballerina build greet
Compiling source
	pubudu/greet:0.1.0

Creating balos
	target/balo/greet-2019r3-any-0.1.0.balo

Running tests
    pubudu/greet:0.1.0
	No tests found

Generating executables
	target/bin/greet.jar

Generating greetings
	target/greetings/greet.txt
```

The `target/greetings/greet.txt` file should contain the following text: `Guten Tag! from add()`

## Learning More About Writing Compiler Extensions

> The example we considered in this how-to guide is a basic compiler extension. If you are looking for something which 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example we considered in this how-to guide is a basic compiler extension. If you are looking for something which 
```
```suggestion
The example considered in this how-to guide is a basic compiler extension. If you are looking for something which 
```
